The onslaught of the Arab caliphates and
repeated infighting in the 7th century
had forced the Roman Empire into a
desperate fight for survival. The empire
was in deep trouble and just a shadow of
what it had been a century prior. At the
end of the tumultuous century, the rise
of Emperor Leonius in 695 AD would
herald a period remembered as the 20
years of anarchy, seeing the empire
weakened even further by internal
unrest.
The emperor Leonius was able to hold on
to power for only a few years and his
reign was chiefly marked by the Arabs
finally reaching the western provinces
and invading Africa where they conquered
its ancient capital of Carthage in 696
AD. Though the city was retaken the
following year, the Arabs were able to
regroup and seize Carthage yet again in
698 AD.
This led to the fall of almost the
entirety of the exircuit of Africa, save
for the remote fortress of Septum.
Leonius was deposed and exiled shortly
after this defeat by Tiberius III,
commander of the army sent to retake
Carthage, who ascended as the new
emperor.
Leonius's usurper proved to be just as
incapable and undistinguished as the man
he had overthrown. and found himself
opposed in 705 AD by Justinian II who
now returned from exile in Crimea with
the backing of the Bulgars promising
them tribute should they aid him in
retaking the throne.
Justinian swiftly took Constantinople
and had both Tiberius and Leonius
executed, after which he embarked on a
bitter campaign of vengeance against his
political rivals, which distracted the
empire enough for the Arabs to gain yet
more ground in Anatolia between 708 and
710 AD.
The unpopular Justinian was then deposed
and executed by the usurper Philippus in
711 AD who was now faced by wars with
the Arab Umiad caliphate in the east as
well as Justinian's old vulgar allies in
the west. At the same time, Septum, the
last stronghold in North Africa, fell to
the Arabs after holding out for several
years. Like his predecessors in this
crisis. However, Philipicus' greatest
threat came from within his own empire
and he was deposed and exiled less than
2 years after coming to power following
a mutiny by the Obscion theme in 713 AD
who supported Anastasius II as emperor.
During this period, Anastasia discovered
that the Arabs were planning a major
attack on Constantinople itself and
began preparations for a siege. But he
was soon deposed after a brief civil war
in 715 AD by the usurper Theodosius III,
again with the support of the
influential Obsician theme. The new
emperor quickly negotiated a peace
treaty with the Bulgers, planning to
focus his efforts on the Arabs, much
like his predecessor.
Unfortunately for Theodosius, he too
proved unable to hold on to power for
long and in 717 AD faced a rebellion
from Leo, a talented soldier from Isoria
and the commander of the Anatolicon
theme, who was also backed by the
Armeniaon theme under Artastus. Leo was
able to swiftly seize control of
Constantinople after Theodosius
abdicated, bringing an end to the 20
years of anarchy and marking the ascent
of the Isurian dynasty.
The second Arab siege of Constantinople.
If you're watching this, you've probably
gone down more history rabbit holes than
you can count. the fall of Rome, the
rise of the Mongols, obscure wars. Then
a week later, you can barely remember
the details. Here's the bigger problem,
though. You could ask ChatGPT about any
of those topics, but they'd give you
generic answers from the internet. They
don't know what you've been watching,
your trusted sources. Your knowledge is
invisible to your AI. That's what
Recall, our sponsor, solves. a personal
knowledge base. With one click, you can
save any video, article, podcast, or
PDF, and it automatically summarizes,
organizes, and connects it to everything
else I saved. So, this video on the fall
of the Western Roman Empire connects to
this other video on why did the East
survive. But with the new recall 2.0
update, your knowledge base now powers
your AI.
Talk to everything you've saved, the
internet or both at the same time. You
have the choice and the control. Choose
the model, cloud, GPT, Gemini, and
choose what to talk to. Say I'm
researching a video on the fall of Rome.
I can ask across my saved notes,
research, and history videos. What are
the main theories for why Rome fell? And
what does newer scholarship say about
them? It blends my own material with the
internet sources in a single answer. Or
I can ask in that Nagia video I saved
last week, where exactly was the part
about the internal instability behind
Rome's decline? And it finds that exact
moment for me. With recall, I'm able to
access and learn from my knowledge in a
way I had never thought of before. In
fact, I can even make a quiz in recall
on today's video. and I want to see how
much you actually retained. It's a
public challenge. The link is in the
description. Top the leaderboard if you
can. I'll be watching. Try Recall for
yourself for free or use my code Nalagia
25 for 25% off. Emperor
Leo III was now faced with an imminent
Arab invasion as a massive army under
the Umiad Khalifs Sullean's half-brother
Maslama Iban Abd al- Malik had already
crossed the Taus mountains the previous
year and was marching directly on
Constantinople.
Maslama's ground forces are said to have
numbered anywhere between 120,000 to
200,000 men, while his fleet boasted
1,800 vessels.
However much the figure may have been
exaggerated, it is evidence that this
campaign represented a major commitment
from the caliphate. With the Romans
having been weakened and distracted by
several years of infighting, they proved
unable to offer any meaningful
resistance to the Arab advance as they
besieged the capital on August 717 AD.
Pitching their main camp at Hebdon.
After establishing their siege lines,
the Arabs attempted to storm the
Theodosian walls later in the month, but
were bloodily repelled by the defenders.
The Arabs then started to raid the
countryside for supplies as well as to
eliminate Roman outposts in the area
while their fleet arrived at the start
of September to blockade the city. A
detachment of the Arab Navy was ambushed
a few days after this by Roman warships
outfitted with Greek fire. And as in the
previous siege, these incendiary weapons
proved very effective. Skirmishes at
both land and sea between the Romans and
Arabs continued on a regular basis, but
a third party now entered the siege. The
Bulggers had no desire to see the Arabs
extend their influence further west and
started to harass their siege lines,
winning a pitched battle against them in
the autumn. Now caught between the
resolute Roman defenders and the Bulgar
army, the Arab siege became gradually
more difficult to maintain. In October,
one of the senior Arab commanders was
killed. And as winter came, Maslama
found his logistical problems quickly
increasing. Food became difficult to
forage, especially since the bulggers
remained active in the area, and disease
started to take a heavy toll on the
Arabs as well. Hope for the besieures
came in the spring of 718, however, as
Arab reinforcements were sent from Egypt
and Africa by sea, and a second army
crossed the Taus Mountains in Anatolia
by land under the general Martisan while
foraging for food would now become
easier. However, before their
reinforcements could arrive by sea, they
were intercepted by the Roman navy,
whose Greek fire once again gave them
the advantage in battle. This was
followed by the mass desertion of the
Coptic Christian sailors in Maslama's
fleet who had been conscripted into the
Arab Navy. Leo was also able to send a
force of his own to Bethnia from the
capital which linked up with troops from
the Obscion theme and then ambushed and
routed Mardisan's army somewhere between
Libos and Safon. In the wake of these
disasters, the Arab fleet was unable to
maintain its blockade any longer, giving
the Romans control of the sea. In August
718 AD, with nothing to show for his
efforts, Maslama received orders from
the new califf, Umar II, to retreat.
Even this was not the end of the Arabs'
woes as they were next ambushed by the
Bulgars as they marched through Thrace,
suffering significant casualties.
To compound this setback even further,
the Arab fleet transporting Maslama and
his surviving troops back to the
caliphate territory was caught in a
series of storms, leading to only five
ships surviving and the loss of most of
his huge army.
Constantinople had survived yet again
and the Roman Empire along with it.
The defense of the empire.
The victory at Constantinople allowed
the Romans to go on the offensive
against the Arabs and within a year they
launched a naval raid into northern
Syria and were pressuring enemy
strongholds in Armenia. There was a
brief attempt by some of Leo's enemies
to restore the exiled Anastasio II as
emperor with support from the Bulgars.
But when the conspirators failed to gain
support from Constantinople, their
Bulgar allies deserted them and they
were captured and executed. Another
controversial issue within the empire
during Leo's reign was the emperor's
support of iconoclism which banned the
worship of idols and icons in order to
bring people closer to God and his
removal of such objects from churches.
However, the Eastern Church had a long
tradition of venerating such icons and
this would prove to be a lasting issue
in the empire. Between 721 and 739 AD,
the Arabs launched several more
incursions into Anatolia as their
military strength gradually recovered,
but they were only able to make minimal
progress, and Leo was able to
successfully deal with the few instances
of rebellion among the themes. The
emperor died in 741 AD after a long
reign marked by many victories over
Rome's enemies. Though his controversial
religious policies meant he was
remembered less fondly by contemporaries
despite his achievements, Leo's son and
successor Constantine V was almost
immediately faced by a revolt led by his
father's old ally Artastus, now the
commander of the Obsician theme, who
defeated the emperor in battle in
Anatolia and seized Constantinople.
However, he in turn was besieged in the
capital by troops loyal to Constantine
and forced to surrender in 743 AD after
which he was blinded and exiled to a
monastery. This marked the fifth time
that the Obsician theme had rebelled and
it became clear to Constantine that
change was needed. His reign marked
another important reform in the Roman
military with the creation of the
Tagmada, probably sometime between 743
and 745 AD, which became the second main
branch of the imperial army alongside
the thematic troops in the provinces.
Unlike the theatada, the Tagmada were
compromised entirely of full-time
professional soldiers and were based
around Constantinople itself at the side
of the emperor whose main reason for
creating this new branch of military was
to try and limit the ability of the
themes to rebel. The tagmata also
contained a higher proportion of elite
cavalry which had gradually become the
Roman army's main striking arm.
Constantine campaigned with much success
against the Arabs, storming important
strongholds and even launching a raid
into Syria, proving that the Romans
could still regain the initiative
against them. Another source of reprieve
from pressure in the east would
ultimately come from within the
caliphate itself as the Umiads were
overthrown in a power struggle in 750 AD
and replaced by the Abbassids whose
center of power and main interests were
further east away from the Roman
frontier. This allowed Constantine to
focus his efforts against the Bulgars
and the Balkans who became his main
focus from now on. In the west, the
Romans were continuing to lose ground in
Italy as in 751 AD, Ravena finally fell
to the Lumbars, marking the end of the
exitate of Italy and leading to the loss
of Roman territory in the central and
northern parts of the area. The city of
Rome also detached itself from the
empire under the papacy and henceforth
the western empire once the birthplace
and bulwark of Roman rule would be
confined to southern Italy and Sicily.
Constantine however was highly
successful against the Bulgars, fighting
many campaigns against them until his
death in 775 AD which weakened this
major Roman enemy. Constantine was
succeeded by his son Leo IVth, whose
reign began promisingly by defeating a
revolt instigated by his half-brothers
in 776 AD, after which he campaigned
with success in Syria against the
Abbassids. He also relaxed the previous
Isurian emperor's ban on the veneration
of icons, which brought him more
goodwill. Unfortunately for the emperor,
he suffered from poor health and died
from tuberculosis just 5 years into his
reign in 780 AD. He was succeeded by his
son Constantine V 6th, but as he was but
a boy when he came to power, his mother
Irene had effective control over the
empire. Fortunately, she would prove to
be an effective ruler. Her first act was
to brutally suppress a rebellion led by
the general Niki Forest whose leaders
she had executed or blinded. News of
this civil war spread quickly to the
Arabs who took advantage of the chaos
caused to renew their attacks on
Anatolia in 781 AD. Though the Romans
would ultimately be able to repel them
to bring further stability to the
empire. Irene also had the practice of
iconoclism which had long been a
contentious issue for the Romans revoked
after a church council meeting in Nika
in 787 AD. However, Irene's son, the
emperor Constantine, had come of age by
790 AD and was eager to assume more
direct control over the empire, which
his ambitious mother proved reluctant to
allow as it would diminish her own
influence. This led to a vicious power
struggle within Constantinople and
unrest among the Roman military. But
Irene and Constantine were able to
reconcile in 792 AD and became co-rulers
of the empire. However, Constantine
proved to be a weak and incompetent
emperor who was easily overshadowed by
his mother, leading to Irene having him
arrested and blinded in 797 AD. Now in
sole control of the empire, Irene began
referring to herself as Bicilius or
emperor instead of the traditional
Bicilusa or empress. Yet Irene's
position was precarious from the start
and her popularity was further damaged
by her disastrous financial policy and
neglect of the Roman army. To strengthen
her position, Irene attempted to marry
the Frankish king Charlemagne of the
Carolinian dynasty in 800 AD, but he
turned down the offer, refusing to
acknowledge her rule. An even more
controversial move on his part, however,
was when Charlemagne was crowned that
same year by the Pope as Roman Emperor,
thereby claiming that he and his kingdom
were the successors of the ancient Roman
Empire. These were the origins of the
so-called Holy Roman Empire, as it would
eventually be called, though it would
not be until many years later that it
was more formally created. Despite
Charlemagne's new title, neither he nor
the rest of the Carolinian dynasty nor
the people in his empire were Roman in
any sense, nor did they ever develop a
sense of Roman identity, with these
titles instead being used for the
prestige they still convey. Moreover,
the Germans use of such titles would
come to have grave consequences for
relations with the Roman Empire to the
east. However, a more imminent threat to
Irene lay within her own court as in 802
AD, she was deposed in a coup led by her
chief financial official, Nikki Foris,
who banished the empress to the island
of Lesbus. Her downfall marked the end
of the Isurian dynasty and the beginning
of a new chapter in Roman history.
Despite their dynasty's ignominious end,
however, the Isurian rulers had
ultimately proven successful in
preserving the empire throughout the 8th
century after it had been brought to the
brink of ruin. It would now fall to the
new Nikorian dynasty to lead the Roman
Empire into the 9th century and preserve
this legacy. Yet, despite these
achievements, the empire won't get much
rest. In the west, another emperor
appeared. In the east, the Abbasids
watched for weakness. And in the north,
Conrum of Bulgaria was preparing to
become one of the most terrifying
enemies Constantinople had faced in
generations. The Isorians had saved the
empire from collapse. But what came next
would test whether that survival had
been enough. See you in the next
episode. Like, subscribe, and click the
bell button to not miss it.